feat(dev): custom library development example (#1662)
bonitasoft/bonita-doc: modules/ROOT/pages/custom-library-development.adoc

= Develop a custom library
:description: Develop a custom library project that will be used in a Bonita project and mutualize advanced business rules capabilities.

{description}

> == Why should I develop a custom library ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Why should I develop a custom library?
```

* To extract advanced logic from processes script expressions
* To be able to use standard technology to automate testing for this logic
* To be able to reuse and share this logic between several processes and Bonita projects.
* To better manage my library dependencies

== Initialize the project

[NOTE]
====

> In the below example we use Maven as the project build tool, but it is also possible Gradle if it is the tool of your choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the below example we use Maven as the project build tool, but it is also possible to use Gradle if it is the tool of your choice.
```

<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <groupId>org.bonitasoft.extension</groupId> <1>
    <artifactId>bonita-extension-library</artifactId> <1>
    <version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>

    <name>Bonita extension function library</name>

    <properties>
        <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
        <project.reporting.outputEncoding>UTF-8</project.reporting.outputEncoding>
        <java.version>11</java.version>
        <maven.compiler.source>${java.version}</maven.compiler.source>
        <maven.compiler.target>${java.version}</maven.compiler.target>
    </properties>

</project>
----
<1> You may choose your own `groupId` and `artifactId`

== Integration with Bonita

=== Using the Runtime BOM

This library will be executed in the Bonita Runtime that already comes with `provided` dependencies in its class-path.
To avoid dependencies conflicts between our custom library and the Bonita Runtime, we can use a **Bill Of Material** (BOM).

> First, we need to define the target Bonita runtime version. You must use the xref:product-versioning.adoc#_technical_id[technical id] as version. Add a `bonita-runtime.version` property in `properties` section of the pom.xml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we need to define the target Bonita runtime version. You must use the xref:product-versioning.adoc#_technical_id[technical id] as version. Add a `bonita-runtime.version` property in the `properties` section of the pom.xml:
```

      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
----

=== Using the Bonita API

Add the `bonita-common` dependency in the `dependencies` section of the pom.xml like this:

[source, xml]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.bonitasoft.engine</groupId>
        <artifactId>bonita-common</artifactId>
        <scope>provided</scope> <1>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----
<1> Here we must use the `provided` scope as this dependency is already in the class-path of the Bonita Runtime.

[NOTE]
====
The dependency `version` is omitted here, as this dependency is imported by the BOM. To identify whether a dependency is already imported by a BOM you can run the `effective-pom` maven goal from the root of your project: `mvn help:effective-pom`
====

To trace what our logic is doing we will need a logging API. Bonita Runtime comes with `slf4j-api`.
So we also add this `provided` dependency in our project.

[source, xml]
----
<dependencies>
    ...
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.slf4j</groupId>
        <artifactId>slf4j-api</artifactId>
        <scope>provided</scope>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

== Implement the Business logic

> In this example, we are going to code a function that retrieves the user who executed a task with specific name in a given process instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we are going to code a function that retrieves the user who executed a task with a specific name in a given process instance.
```

Maven projects have a default folder structure to find source files to build:

* Java sources are expected in the `src/main/java` folder
* Java test sources are expected in the `src/test/java` folder
* Resources are expected in the `src/main/resources` folder
* Test resources are expected in the `src/test/resources` folder

Create a `Users.java` Java class as entry point for our function. 
This source must be in `src/main/java` folder. 

> In addition it must respect java package convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, it must respect java package convention.
```

        
        LOGGER.debug("User with id {} has executed task {} in process instance {}", executedBy, taskName, rootProcessInstanceId);
        
        return executedBy;

    }

    private Users() {
    }
}

----
<1> Create a `Logger` to monitor the code execution
<2> Use a `public` and `static` method to be called from a Script expression in a process.

== Building the project

From a terminal, at the root of the project, run:

```shell
$ mvn package
```

It will package the `bonita-extension-library-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar` file in the `target` folder of the project.
This file can be installed as a project extension in Bonita Studio using the Overview > Extensions > Add custom extension... > Other action.
Select `From file` option, and browse to the `bonita-extension-library-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar` file. Click on `Import`.

You can now add this dependency in your xref:managing-dependencies.adoc#_configure_process_dependencies[process configuration], and call `org.bonitasoft.extension.Users.getUserWhoExecutedTaskWithName(apiAccessor, rootProcessInstanceId, 'A task name')` from a Script expression.

[NOTE]
====

> `apiAccessor` and `rootProcessInstanceId` are injected in Script expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`apiAccessor` and `rootProcessInstanceId` are injected in the Script expression
```

====

== Automated tests

=== Unit tests

> Add and setup `test` dependencies in your project like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add and set up `test` dependencies in your project like this:
```

                .thenReturn(new SearchResultImpl<>(1, List.of(myTaskArchivedInstance)));

        // When
        long userWhoExecutedTaskWithName = Users.getUserWhoExecutedTaskWithName(apiAccessor, 1L, "My task");

        // Then
        assertEquals(userWhoExecutedTaskWithName, userId);
    }

    @ParameterizedTest
    @ValueSource(strings = { " ", "Unknown task" })
    @NullAndEmptySource
    void testGetUserWhoExecutedTaskWithNameThrowsIllegalArgumentException(String taskName) throws SearchException {
        // Given
        when(apiAccessor.getProcessAPI().searchArchivedHumanTasks(Mockito.any()))
                .thenReturn(new SearchResultImpl<>(1, List.of()));

        // Expect
        assertThrows(IllegalArgumentException.class,
                () -> Users.getUserWhoExecutedTaskWithName(apiAccessor, 1L, taskName));

    }
    
    @Test
    void testGetUserWhoExecutedTaskWithNameThrowsIllegalArgumentExceptionWhenAPIAccessorIsNull() throws SearchException {
        // Expect
        assertThrows(IllegalArgumentException.class,
                () -> Users.getUserWhoExecutedTaskWithName(null, 1L, "My Task"));

    }
}
----

> The goal of this example is not to dig into https://junit.org/junit5/docs/current/user-guide/[Junit5] and https://site.mockito.org/[Mockito]. If you are curious about those framework, visit their documentation site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this example is not to dig into https://junit.org/junit5/docs/current/user-guide/[Junit5] and https://site.mockito.org/[Mockito]. If you are curious about those frameworks, visit their documentation site.
```

$ mvn verify
```

=== Test coverage

Now that we have tests, an interesting metric to monitor is the code (or test) coverage. It represents the percentage of all the possible branches in code that are covered by our tests.

To compute this coverage, we will use https://www.eclemma.org/jacoco/[Jacoco]. Add the `jacoco-maven-plugin` to the project:

[source, xml]
.pom.xml
----
<properties>
    ...
    <jacoco-maven-plugin.version>0.8.7</jacoco-maven-plugin.version>
</properties>

...

<build>
    ...
    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>org.jacoco</groupId>
            <artifactId>jacoco-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>${jacoco-maven-plugin.version}</version>
            <executions>
                <execution>
                  <goals>
                    <goal>prepare-agent</goal>
                  </goals>
                </execution>
                <execution>
                  <id>generate-code-coverage-report</id>
                  <phase>test</phase>
                  <goals>
                    <goal>report</goal>
                  </goals>
                </execution>
            </executions>
        </plugin>
    </plugins>
</build>
----

> Re run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Re-run the following command:
```

```shell
$ mvn verify
```

It should build a coverage report in `target/site/jacoco/index.html`.

== Source control and continuous delivery (Optional)

While optional, it is highly recommended to use a SCM to ease the collaboration around this project. You also want to use a Continous Integration environment that will build and test your library as often as required. For the sake of this example we will use Git and GitHub  
but other options are available.

=== Git (Source Control Management)

> Git is an advanced tool and we won't dig too much in the detail of its usage. We will just see a few command that get us going on GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Git is an advanced tool and we won't dig too much into the detail of its usage. We will just see a few commands that get us going on GitHub.
```

Initialize the Git repository. From a terminal, at the root of your project, run:

```shell
$ git init
```

Create a `.gitignore` file at the root of your project:

[source, properties]
.gitignore
----
# Maven
target/
pom.xml.tag
pom.xml.releaseBackup
pom.xml.versionsBackup
pom.xml.next
release.properties
dependency-reduced-pom.xml
buildNumber.properties
.mvn/timing.properties
.mvn/wrapper/maven-wrapper.jar

# Eclipse
.classpath
.project
.settings/
 
# Intellij
.idea/
*.iml
*.iws
 
# Mac
.DS_Store
----

Install Maven wrapper.

```shell
$ mvn -N io.takari:maven:0.7.7:wrapper
```

[NOTE]
====
The Maven wrapper binds your project to specific embedded Maven version binary. We will use it later with GitHub actions.
====

Then create a git **commit** with those commands:

```shell
$ git add -A <1>
$ git commit -m "initialize the git repository" <2>
```
<1> Add all (not ignored) modified/new files in the content staged for the next commit.
<2> Create a commit with the given message

=== GitHub

> You will need to create a https://github.com/signup[GitHub account] if you (or your company) not already have one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need to create a https://github.com/signup[GitHub account] if you (or your company) does not already have one.
```

==== New GitHub repository

https://github.com/new[Create a new repository] named `bonita-extension-library`. Choose the `owner` of the repository (you or another organization). For this example you can make the repository `private`. Click on `Create repository`.

Then back to your terminal, at the root of the project, you can **push** your repository to the GitHub _remote_ like this:

```shell
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:<owner>/bonita-extension-library.git <1>
$ git branch -M main <2>
$ git push -u origin main <3>
```
<1> Define a _remote_ origin for the local copy of the repository
<2> Create a _branch_ named `main` from the current HEAD (Our initial commit)

> <3> Push the branch to the define remote origin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> Push the branch to the defined remote origin
```

If your refresh the GitHub project repository page (https://github.com/<owner>/bonita-extension-library) you should see your source code and single `main` branch.

===== Add a README.md

> An highly recommended practice, is to add a `README.md` file at the root of your project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A highly recommended practice is to add a `README.md` file at the root of your project. 
```

> This piece of documentation aims at helping other contributors to quickly jump into the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This piece of documentation aims at helping other contributors quickly jump into the project.
```

> It should contains a small description of the purpose of the project, how to setup a development environment and any kind of information that you consider relevant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should contain a small description of the purpose of the project, how to set up a development environment, and any kind of information that you consider relevant.
```

In this example, we are adding a GPLv2 License.

=== Release management

The `maven-release-plugin` will help us automate the release process of our Maven project.
To setup this plug-in, add the following configuration in the `pom.xml`:

[source, xml]
.pom.xml
----
<properties>
    ...
    <maven-release-plugin.version>2.5.3</maven-release-plugin.version>
</properties>

<build>
    <pluginManagement>
        <plugins>
            ...
            <plugin>
                <artifactId>maven-release-plugin</artifactId>
                <version>${maven-release-plugin.version}</version>
                <configuration>
                    <tagNameFormat>v@{project.version}</tagNameFormat>
                    <indentSize>4</indentSize>
                </configuration>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </pluginManagement>
    ...
</build>

<scm>
    <developerConnection>scm:git:https://github.com/<owner>/bonita-extension-library.git</developerConnection>
    <connection>scm:git:https://github.com/<owner>/bonita-extension-library.git</connection>
    <url>https://github.com/<owner>/bonita-extension-library</url>
</scm>
----

> We will later define a GitHub action that trigger a release of our project using this plug-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will later define a GitHub action that triggers a release of our project using this plug-in.
```

    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <groupId>org.bonitasoft.extension</groupId> <1>
    <artifactId>bonita-extension-library</artifactId> <1>
    <version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>

    <name>Bonita extension function library</name>

    <properties>
        <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
        <project.reporting.outputEncoding>UTF-8</project.reporting.outputEncoding>
        <java.version>11</java.version>
        <maven.compiler.source>${java.version}</maven.compiler.source>
        <maven.compiler.target>${java.version}</maven.compiler.target>
    </properties>

</project>
----
<1> You may choose your own `groupId` and `artifactId`

== Integration with Bonita

=== Using the Runtime BOM

This library will be executed in the Bonita Runtime that already comes with `provided` dependencies in its class-path.
To avoid dependencies conflicts between our custom library and the Bonita Runtime, we can use a **Bill Of Material** (BOM).

First, we need to define the target Bonita runtime version. Add a `bonita-runtime.version` property in `properties` section of the pom.xml:

[source, xml]
----

> <properties>

Reviewer 2: This section should point out to a table for the user to master engine version versus platform version.

= Develop a custom library
:description: Develop a custom library project that will be used in a Bonita project and mutualize advanced business rules capabilities.

{description}

== Why should I develop a custom library ?

* To extract advanced logic from processes script expressions
* To be able to use standard technology to automate testing for this logic
* To be able to reuse and share this logic between several processes and Bonita projects.
* To better manage my library dependencies

> == Initialize the project

Reviewer 3: I suggest to add a 'prerequisite' section before this one, to inform the user that Maven and Java must be installed first, and that some development skills are required.

[NOTE]
====

> In the below example we use Maven as the project build tool, but it is also possible Gradle if it is the tool of your choice.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the below example, we use Maven as the project build tool. It could also be achieved using Gradle.
```

====

>  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

=== Basic setup

Create a new folder on your file system, and call it `bonita-extension-library`.
At the root of this folder create a `pom.xml` file.

[source, xml]
.pom.xml
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <groupId>org.bonitasoft.extension</groupId> <1>
    <artifactId>bonita-extension-library</artifactId> <1>
    <version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>

    <name>Bonita extension function library</name>

    <properties>
        <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
        <project.reporting.outputEncoding>UTF-8</project.reporting.outputEncoding>
        <java.version>11</java.version>
        <maven.compiler.source>${java.version}</maven.compiler.source>
        <maven.compiler.target>${java.version}</maven.compiler.target>
    </properties>

</project>
----
<1> You may choose your own `groupId` and `artifactId`

== Integration with Bonita

> === Using the Runtime BOM

Reviewer 3: The word 'using' gives the feeling that there is a choice to do between using the runtime bom or the java api. 

```suggestion
=== Add the Runtime BOM
```

This library will be executed in the Bonita Runtime that already comes with `provided` dependencies in its class-path.
To avoid dependencies conflicts between our custom library and the Bonita Runtime, we can use a https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#bill-of-materials-bom-poms[**Bill Of Material** (BOM), window = "_blank"].

First, we need to define the target Bonita runtime version. You must use the xref:product-versioning.adoc#_technical_id[technical id] as version. Add a `bonita-runtime.version` property in `properties` section of the pom.xml:

[source, xml]
----
<properties>
    ...
    <bonita-runtime.version>7.13.0</bonita-runtime.version>
</properties>
----

Then, we can `import` the BOM artifact in the `dependencyManagement` section of the `pom.xml` like this:

[source, xml]
----
 <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>org.bonitasoft.runtime</groupId>
        <artifactId>bonita-runtime-bom</artifactId>
        <version>${bonita-runtime.version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
----

> === Using the Bonita API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Add the Bonita API
```

Add the `bonita-common` dependency in the `dependencies` section of the pom.xml like this:

[source, xml]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.bonitasoft.engine</groupId>
        <artifactId>bonita-common</artifactId>
        <scope>provided</scope> <1>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----
<1> Here we must use the `provided` scope as this dependency is already in the class-path of the Bonita Runtime.

[NOTE]
====
The dependency `version` is omitted here, as this dependency is imported by the BOM. To identify whether a dependency is already imported by a BOM you can run the `effective-pom` maven goal from the root of your project: `mvn help:effective-pom`
====

To trace what our logic is doing we will need a logging API. Bonita Runtime comes with `slf4j-api`.
So we also add this `provided` dependency in our project.

[source, xml]
----
<dependencies>
    ...
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.slf4j</groupId>
        <artifactId>slf4j-api</artifactId>
        <scope>provided</scope>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

== Implement the Business logic

> In this example, we are going to code a function that retrieves the user who executed a task with specific name in a given process instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, we are going to code a function that retrieves the user who executed a task with a specific name in a given process instance.
```

     * 
     * @param apiAccessor, a {@link APIAccessor}
     * @param rootProcessInstanceId, the id of the root process instance
     * @param taskName, the name of the task
     * @return the id of the user who execute the task
     * @throws SearchException
     * @throws IllegalArgumentException when taskName is null or empty
     * @throws IllegalArgumentException when apiAccessor is null
     * @throws IllegalArgumentException when no task with taskName has been executed in the given rootProcessInstanceId
     */
    public static long getUserWhoExecutedTaskWithName(APIAccessor apiAccessor, <2>
            long rootProcessInstanceId,
            String taskName) throws SearchException {
        
        if(taskName == null || taskName.isBlank()) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("taskName cannot be null or empty");
        }
        
        if(apiAccessor == null) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("apiAccessor cannot be null");
        }
        
        LOGGER.debug("Searching user who executed task {} in process instance {}", taskName, rootProcessInstanceId);

        var executedBy = apiAccessor.getProcessAPI()

>                 .searchArchivedHumanTasks(new SearchOptionsBuilder(0, 1)

Reviewer 3: Does it work the same way when the process is archived / in progress ?
